Source Apportionment of Air Toxics in Bountiful: A focus on formaldehyde and dichloromethane emissions

C. Jaramillo, K.E. Kelly, N. Daher, J. Hansen, D. Eatough

A 2014 Utah Division of Air Quality (DAQ) study showed that beginning in 2008, the Bountiful monitoring site exhibited periodic Dichloromethane (DCM) spikes that reached very high levels. Prior to October 2008, concentrations of DCM were all below the cancer risk threshold of 0.3 ppb. Between 2008 and 2015, more than a half of Bountiful’s DCM measurements exceeded 0.3 ppb. On March 30, 2014, DCM levels reached 2420 ppbv, nearly 8000 times the cancer risk threshold. This 2014 study also revealed that beginning in 2013, the Bountiful station began to experience elevated levels of formaldehyde during the winter, with mean formaldehyde concentrations more than double those at the Lindon and West Valley locations.

This study applied Positive Matrix Factorization (PMF), a source apportionment technique, to measurements of carbonyls (including aldehydes), VOCs, PM2.5, and NOx for the Bountiful monitoring station from 2004-2017 to identify the plausible sources of DCM and formaldehyde in the Bountiful area. In addition, twenty-four hour back-trajectories were calculated using the Hybrid Single Particle Integrated Trajectory (HYSPLIT-4) model. The trajectories were evaluated for the days when elevated DCM concentrations were observed.

The results indicate that approximately 92 % of the measured DCM appears to be coming from a unique DCM source that began emitting in 2008, while the remaing 8 % is associated with a variety of sources. Moreover, results suggest that formaldehyde comes from both primary and secondary sources; about  30 % of the formaldehyde emissions are coming form secondary carbonyl production, 25% from industrial emissions, 20% from biomass burning , 16%  from petrochemical industry and the remaining 9% from gasoline and landfill emissions.
Formaldehyde and DCM concentration showed sporadic high mass concentrations, with no weekday/weekend or seasonal patterns. The back-trajectories performed for the highest DCM events did not contribute in the identification of the possible source(s), mostly because the trajectories were originated from different directions. Contributions of secondary carbonyl production including formaldehyde emissions were higher during summer time from 2007 to 2010. Between 2013 and 2017, the contributions were more prominent for winter time. The higher contribution of formaldehyde and other carbonyls production for winter 2013 was linked to the photochemistry activity due to an increase in the snow cover for that season; however, for the years 2014-2017, contributions may be a combination of more precursor emissions and photochemistry activity. Overall, these results suggest that secondary formation is still an important source of formaldehyde in winter season.
In addition to DCM and formaldehyde, PMF identified VOC contributions from the petrochemical industry, gasoline exhaust, diesel exhaust, industrial sources, secondary carbonyl production, biomass burning emissions and a unique source of carbon disulfide, potentially from a landfill, before 2013.
